We're on.
Well, I guess we start.
This book's a departure for you, in form.
Why do you say that?
Why do I say that?
In terms of content, in terms of the... In content, yes.
Form, not really.
Not form.
I retract.
I meant in terms of what the expression and what the...
what you're trying to do fictionally.
Well, I think that it's a departure in the sense that it's so much more geographically centered in the United States, but I'm not entirely sure that it's a great departure in terms of theme or
in terms of my point of view.
Do you think so?
Maybe I'm probing just a little too deep.
Why don't you go ahead and get right to what you mean to me.
No, I'm just actually looking for a discussion on
on your view as a writer of fiction, whereas the first two books did seem to be very clearly autobiographical, certainly had autobiographical resonances, this could or could not.
I mean, this seems to be more of a story.
I mean, it could be your Harvard experience, but it doesn't necessarily have to be.
Well, I think it's easy to overstate the autobiographical
content of the first two books.
Obviously, the outline of my life as a child and a young boy corresponds with the story of wartime life.
But I really used that material in my experiences during the war, a little bit before the war in Poland.
directly after it to make what I consider a novel, not a memoir.
So there is stuff from my life, but it's been reworked and changed and idealized for short and twisted around.
So it's not an autobiography.
The second book is not an autobiography either.
I'm very different from the protagonist.
I think that they were clearly influenced by autobiographical events, by events in your life.
I think that's been fairly well established.
I understand, but I think that whereas it's perfectly clear that I'm not Max or Charlie or Toby or God knows Laura, as Max saw it, there is nothing in that book that is not drawn
from my experience.
I find it very difficult to think of writing a book which I have not in some way lived.
So I think that you could say that there is an autobiographical content and that the book comes out of what I've lived and observed rather than
out of some storyline that I might have imagined and then hung some clothes upon.
I'm not sure that perhaps it's a distinction without a difference, but it does make a difference to me.
I think that all fiction of my sort comes out of one's life.
You say fiction of my sort.
How do you define that?
fiction written by a serious writer in this part of the century.
It's really modern, serious modern fiction.
I don't mean to imply in the least that there is a line that you could trace through as Max saw it and say,
This corresponds to what Begley did here or there.
It doesn't.
Except that I had lived to China, obviously.
I did go to Harvard College, and I went to Harvard Law School.
I spent a good deal of time in this part of the world, in Boston, Cambridge, and so on.
So the things that are told in the book about whether it's China, Boston, or Cambridge, or the lakes,
or Lake Como.
There are places where... And this has to enter your writing, of course.
To get back to your perception of what the novel is supposed to accomplish, apparently you do believe that the novel has a function beyond any kind of entertainment purpose.
You're not writing merely to entertain.
I would say, is that a fair statement?
Well, I don't know.
I don't know whether it's a fair statement because I do think that one writes, at least I write a novel, in order to tell a story that a reader will want to read and that I hope will entertain the reader.
I did not write to preach.
Now, necessarily, if one
is successful in writing a novel, it will appeal to something in the mind and in the heart of the reader.
It will work its own charms, if you like, on the reader.
But I don't have a didactic purpose.
I think that I'm closer to wanting to entertain and delight
than to wanting to teach.
Do you think that at this point in your adult life that, I mean, quite a bit has been made in the press, that you took up writing mid-life, mid-fifties, I guess?
Yes.
Writing took me up.
I wonder if you could pick up on that.
This isn't something that you either had the time or the inclination to do, say, when you're in your 30s or your 40s?
Well, you know, it's very difficult to explain these things.
I don't have an explanation.
I think I was very much the same person in my 30s, in my 40s, as I was in my 50s.
Obviously, the ravages of time, putting aside.
And I'm not sure that I was any less busy during my 40s or 30s than I have been during my 50s in the country, I think, in some ways.
I have worked harder at my legal work during my 50s than now than I ever did before.
But for some reason,
which I don't know what reason it is.
I did not write a book before my mid-fifties.
Perhaps there was something that was working its way through my subconscious, if you want to call it that, or perhaps it was a process of maturation, perhaps it was a change
in me the nature of which is not known to me.
I don't suggest for a moment that I'm an automatic writer.
I just sit down, my pen moves.
But honestly, for some reason, at the age, whatever age it was, I was in 89, I guess I was 55, I did
write a book, and it had a liberating effect on me in the sense that it seems to have made me able to continue to write.
Now, why that did not happen 10 years or 15 years earlier puzzles me just as much as it might puzzle you.
I have no answer.
This thing was almost written in a rush.
I mean, this isn't something that you labored on for a period of... No, no, no.
It was written not in a rush.
I don't mean in a rush, but let's say in a sustained period.
Yes, absolutely.
I wrote every day, and I wrote rather... I don't mean to have suggested the work that it was rushed.
No, no, no.
I did not, in the least, take it that way.
I mean, it is not... I'm trying to be somehow accurate.
It is not as though I had sat down and...
I felt some kind of floodgates had opened and prose rushed through.
It wasn't like that.
I simply sat down and I wrote each day.
I finished within a relatively brief period of time, within three months.
In that case, did you start with the character or with the experience?
Well I think that I started with a point of view and I suppose a character because I was interested in a man who had been a child of a certain sort.
So you might say that it was a character and the experience was of course right there.
I was interested in what would be
a man who had had a childhood of that particular sort.
It turned out that I wrote about the child and not the man in that first book.
But I started out with that conception of a man of a certain age who has had a series of
Innocent, unspeakable experiences.
And how was one to deal with that material?
How would one organize it?
How would one present it?
That was the inception of that book.
And in the case of The Man Who Was Late, my second novel... I'm sorry.
I'm just checking myself to be sure if I... In the case of my second novel,
it was clearly the start was not precisely a character the start was an incident the incident had to do with can one repair a misstep a
an opportunity, can man catch up with an opportunity that was lost, an opportunity of tremendous emotional significance and of course that had to do with the character of a man and the protagonist, Ben.
Once I had that, I knew exactly what Ben was like and what the problem with Ben was.
Then from that, the narrative really outflowed inevitably, so it seemed to me.
I know that abstractly it could have been told in many other ways, but that was the way in which I told it.
And I did not hesitate very much about how I would tell it.
And I must say that with respect to this last book, as Max saw it,
that also began with an incident the illness and the death of a young man I had thought about and I wondered about the survivor what would the survivor feel and what would he do was something that so it was a character of the
survivor that interested me.
Well, but there's also quite a generational difference here, too, which comes into play.
What do you mean by that?
Well, the victim, obviously, and the survivor.
I mean, we're talking about not necessarily a clash of generations, but perceptions.
Maybe that's not part of the
I hadn't thought of it this way.
I simply was interested really in the question of friendship, solidarity, what one does when one
witnesses the disappearance of someone, and a rather ghastly disappearance of someone who has loved.
What are the reactions to it?
So that book just started with the conception of a character, which to me is not terribly different from the conception point of view.
I'm not sure that I'm answering as well as you would like me to, but I'm doing my best.
No, we're doing fine.
I'm really just... Let me say also, for me, the most challenging interviews are with novelists, because novels speak for themselves.
Well, that's precisely my view, too.
And it's so hard for me, and I really hate to ask you what a book is about, because that's my job.
No, you see, I...
I've always, ever since I was a young man when I was a college student, I've always been puzzled by the question of what is the book about?
Well, I haven't tried to ask that question.
I know, because I've often asked myself the question that's been asked to me, and I've always thought, well, it's about precisely what it says.
So, in order to answer
Or even what I think it says.
I mean, again, reading a book is a one-on-one exercise.
It's probably the only cultural exchange where a person goes one-on-one with the artist.
So I am trying to get some material that will be useful for a feature piece.
I think you and I see it very much the same way.
Thank you.
Not at all.
You're fluent in a number of languages.
Do you write and you think in English?
Well, I certainly write in English, and I think in English, except when I'm speaking to my wife or some of my children, in which case I think in French.
You do think in French.
For sure.
If you speak a language very well, you obviously have to think in that language.
You don't sit there and translate.
And when I speak to my mother or somebody who's Polish, I think in Polish.
And I'm not really completely fluent in any language except those three.
I can get along in all languages.
But I'm not sure ever whether I think in them or don't think in them.
Whereas in those three languages, obviously, when I speak French, I start thinking French.
I don't think in English.
It's not like I'm trying to stretch to Joseph Cartwright here either.
Well, he's, I think, somewhat different in that he learned English a little later.
in life than I did, I believe.
But then it became so painstaking, though, in his choice of language.
Yes.
Well, I had never any doubt that if I were to write, I would write in English simply because my education has opened in English.
I hardly had any education before.
Well, not really getting into the novel itself, but in terms of the stylistic devices that you use, I was interested in that.
front half of the book, you really don't quote directly, you paraphrase.
Well, he says, but you don't really use quotation marks, I guess.
Oh, there's lots of dialogue in it, and it's direct dialogue, but I don't use quotation marks for a very simple reason.
I don't like the looks of quotation marks.
It's very different from what I did in Wartime Lives.
Right, but there are quotes at the back of the book.
Never.
I've got quotation marks.
Please continue.
I've never used quotation marks in this book.
There's some right there, for instance.
That is because I'm quoting from the text of Verdi's.
I don't use quotation marks for that.
And that's just because you don't like them?
That's right.
It's simply that.
It's got nothing to do with that.
No, I just simply don't like the looks.
And that's the sole reason.
But that's the explanation for no quotation marks in either as Max saw it or in Wartime Lies.
Or the man who was late.
In Wartime Lies, I really did avoid direct dialogue.
for a very specific reason, which is that I did not want to... What do you want?
I did not want to try to write what was in my ear Polish dialogue in English, and particularly a child dialogue.
I did not think it would sound
true to me, authentic.
And I don't like baby English, so I went to an enormous amount of trouble to make almost all the dialogue indirect.
But I have no desire at all to do that, as Max thought, which is full of dialogue.
Oh, it's full of dialogue.
I didn't mean it existed.
It wasn't.
No, no, no.
It's just that I don't use quotation marks.
You don't use quotation marks.
Do you think all of your books as a whole, are they all part of a continuum?
Well, I don't think so.
I think that they're really quite separate.
They're certainly unified by my own sensibility and by the things
that interest me.
The themes that interest me.
But I'm not writing the Comédie We Men, if that's what you think, or the Barchester novels.
But they certainly are continuing.
You seem to be very interested in exploring the dark side of human nature.
Well, I think that's true.
I am.
I don't want to sound pompous, I don't want to sound pompous, but I've always been a very cheerful person and a rather optimistic person.
You are optimistic.
Oh, very much so.
But I've always been, in my personal life, but I've always been very conscious of mortality, of the unspeakable
things that human beings are capable of doing to each other, of the horror, tragedy that lurks constantly around one misstep that you fall into well.
That's something I cannot see life in another way.
when I allow myself to do so.
And it's simply the other side of me.
In daily life, in the way I conduct my own existence, the extent that anybody conducts their existence of, as I said, cheerful, optimistic, always think there is a solution
I'm quite happy.
In fact, I'm very happy in my personal life.
But that is not somehow how I think about it.
But these novels, and I'm talking about all of them now, they don't spring from a sense of optimism, do they?
No, but as I'm trying to tell you,
There seems to be a division between me as a functioning person who always thinks that somehow things will work out, that I will manage, that things can be arranged, that in the end
there is a good solution for whatever is before me which is my sort of operational mode and the me who writes or the me who observes because when I observe things I see the very ugly dark side of things but then there is a me who somehow leaves that fellow traveler and
That's the one who always catches the cab.
The cab needs to be caught in the rain.
Figures out some way to have a pleasant time.
Finds a solution for a client to make legal work and does not give up.
You're very committed to the legal profession.
There definitely are two
Oh, yes, enormously.
Enormously, enormously committed to it.
And when you're practicing law, you're practicing law, and the writer is someplace else.
The writer is somewhere else, except that the writer is obviously there looking on, taking notes.
Really?
Oh, sure.
Taking notes.
Figuratively speaking, I hardly ever take notes anyway.
But you didn't take this up as a form of recreation, I gather.
Which, writing?
Writing.
No, not at all.
I feel so stupid about it, but I have no explanation for why I began to write it.
It was not as though I had been going along and saying to myself, look, just wait for an opportunity.
and he would sit down to write a novel.
I never thought I would.
And I did not mourn that fact.
I simply took it for a given.
And that is not to say that I would not have liked to.
I just did not think that I would.
And there's never been a novel that I began and threw away or that I put in my drawer or sent something
So there's no frustrated novelist in you, I mean.
Well, there isn't really, because everything I've written has been published.
That's quite great.
Except some short stories when I was a kid, and I never submitted for publication.
But literally, I've never had anything rejected.
That's amazing.
Did you write the first novel with a commitment from a publisher?
Well, not at all.
Not at all, I just wrote it and I wasn't at all sure that I would even seek to publish it because I had, and I've said this before to some interviewer, I had a question in my mind which in retrospect does not seem to have been a very intelligent question, but I had it nonetheless.
whether it was alright to make a novel out of that experience.
Was one not obliged if one was going to write about, although I use that word, the Holocaust, was one not obliged to write as a memorialist seeking for the most faithful reproduction of what
You may find that this was a silly question.
Maybe it was, but it tormented me.
And I knew I was writing a novel, but I was not writing my memoirs.
And so when I finished, my wife reads everything I read as I go along.
I mean, reads everything I write.
that writes everything I read.
And I kept on putting that question to her, and she kept on saying, as I said, of course, you should write your novel and don't worry about it.
And then I put the question to a friend of mine who's a writer who I respect enormously, and he told me that he didn't understand
the nature of the moral problem.
And I came to think myself that there was no moral problem because I certainly treated the material with the greatest respect.
So I then decided to be published.
And so it was.
And the other books I certainly don't have to read because I had a contract.
I just wrote them.
I gave it to my agent.
I suppose Knopf had an option in my books, but it was never an issue.
Did the response to that, I mean, obviously the first book had an extraordinary critical response.
In some ways the second one had the better.
It did, but I mean, that wasn't a surprise, though.
After the first one it was a surprise.
Were you surprised by this?
I was in a sort of a state of happy anesthesia.
I was so pleasantly surprised that I began to stop having any feelings about it.
It seemed to be quite extraordinary.
I've always been worried about
being too pleased about anything is because of deeply superstitious.
You are?
Yes, it's terribly superstitious.
And I always think if you say, oh, this is wonderful, it's going to come up and slug you.
Are you superstitious on a day-to-day basis?
Oh, yes, absolutely.
I'm terrified.
For instance, I don't know if there's two positions, particularly Polish, or whether it's a general one, but in Poland it's not good to turn back to your house after you've set out in the morning.
So, for instance, if I leave my house and I've not taken my umbrella with me and it's raining, it requires a tremendous effort of will to go back to get my umbrella.
Yeah, I'm of Greek heritage, and the Greeks feel if you go in one door in a house you have to go out the same door.
Well, I'm full of these.
It's ridiculous.
You see people falling over themselves.
You know, you want to let them out the front door, and they came in at the back door.
And it's kind of funny.
Are you gratified by the response so many people show to serious fiction?
You look at the bestseller list, and it's just so depressing to see the books that are up there week after week.
Well, yes, I am enormously gratified by that.
First of all, I love the response of my friends.
My friends have liked my books.
My family has liked my books.
That is marvelous.
It's the greatest joy possible.
And particularly my friends who I know have both
high moral standard and a high literary standard.
And it is that which I think is the greatest reward.
And the responsive readers who write to me, when I meet them, who say things that are enormously perceptive, that make me certain that they've read the book correctly.
and responded in a way that I think one should respond.
It's simply wonderful.
And I think to learn that there are still some serious readers left in the world.
Yes.
Absolutely.
And there are lots of them.
Young ones, old ones.
People you wouldn't think read, but who suddenly tell you, I've read your book three times.
who write very long letters.
It's a marvelous thing.
And I don't have any fears for the future of the novel.
I don't think it's going to be replaced by comic strips.
Who do you read?
Well, I read very little new fiction than last because I have
limited time for reading, so I mostly reread.
I seem to be, generally speaking, sort of stuck in, as far as novels go, in the Proust, James, Balzac, Trollope, Dickens, Dostoyevsky.
Well, it does.
You're writing this thing.
It's not derivative of anything contemporary, which is probably
validates what you're saying right now.
I mean, your writing doesn't seem to be... I should add Conrad.
I should definitely add Conrad.
Do you consider yourself... I mean, there is an American literary tradition.
Do you consider yourself a part of that?
Yes, I mean, I would be very happy to think that I am in the sort of tradition that
It goes from Hawthorne, to James, to Horton, to Nathaniel West.
He smiled.
Yes.
To R. Scott Fitzgerald.
Hello?
But you're naming all American ladies.
Well, you said American.
I did, but you...
responding in that fashion.
I left out James because I think it was a sort of—he's a totally American writer, but he's in a computer position.
He really is, isn't he?
He jumps on both sides, so to speak.
I'm writing for a number of newspapers who take my feature now.
And one publication I'm writing for, the Summer Scampton's Magazine.
Oh, really?
On Long Island.
And I'm so really, pardon me if I try to stretch and... Not at all.
Do you ever come out there?
I've never been there, as a matter of fact.
But I do understand that you spend quite a bit of time out there, and I'm really... I wish I spent a great... I'm going to try and, you know, pitch the... I don't know how I can really...
I mean, I think just the fact that you do spend a lot of time out there is justifying this as a... I have to give them a list of articles that I'll be doing for them.
Sure.
If you could just give me a little bit of background about... Well, I have a house which is on the wrong side of tracks in Sagatonic.
It's in the sort of scrub bulk that grows where the glacier passed and pushed the...
It's a wonderful house.
It was built by a very gifted architect.
It's extremely simple to live in, flooded with light at night.
Always cheerful.
I like the most trouble because it means we never see any neighbors.
We never have the sense of the sometimes frenetic life of the habitants intruding on us.
But at the same time the beach is so near and it is the most beautiful beach in the world.
I think probably among the least spoiled beaches.
our life in Sakaponik, which is where our house is very simple.
My wife is a writer also.
I know that.
And so we both sort of do whatever we're doing and we do a minimum of shopping just enough to sustain the body.
And we go for it.
We do a huge long walk on the beach twice a day and we swim in the ocean.
Does the beach have a name?
Well, it's really the stretch of beach that goes from Georgica to Bridgehampton.
And we pace up and down it.
We love to swim in the ocean.
And we now have two grandchildren.
come out quite a lot.
We have actually two houses, one next to the other, so the grandchildren are in the other house.
We might say we have two houses and one ate because we just constructed a tree house of which we're extremely proud for grandchildren.
And so we love that place.
We find that going out here for the normal two-day weekend is an experience that's so totally refreshing and restorative.
It's been the best thing.
Have you done much writing out there?
Oh, yes.
I mean, I only write on weekends and on vacations.
I spend as many weekends as I can out there.
Most of my writing has been done out there.
That's great.
Well, that's something I can get into here.
Do you feel that having been this novelist has really added a dimension to your life, an unexpected dimension to your life?
It's been absolutely wonderful.
I like to write.
A lot of writers find writing, I think, macerating, lacerating experience.
I don't.
I find it a release and a great deal of satisfaction.
a dimension of happiness to my life to be able to write.
And there's no question that the fact of having been able to write things that people consider successful is a very wonderful feeling.
I trust I have not become any more conceited than I've always been.
So I don't think it's that.
It's simply that it's satisfying to discover that you can do something that you did not know that you can do.
It's satisfying to be able to go on doing it.
I always thought I was rather a good lawyer.
And that is quite a satisfying thing in itself, the sense of doing a job well.
It's not, the two are not unlike each other.
My brother's attorney.
Yes?
I'm kind of surprised that you say that
The law and writing are similar.
No, I'm saying the satisfaction of doing something well.
I will absolutely agree with that.
When you began the book, did you have it pretty much in focus?
Did you know where it was going?
Which book?
There was no mystery.
This wasn't a road of self-discovery for yourself as you were going along.
Oh, no at all.
In each one of my books I knew exactly what I was going to do.
I told you 85% of what was going to happen along the way.
I don't know how else one—I could not sit down and write something if I did not know where I was going.
This runs so counter to what so many other writers have to say, doesn't it?
Yes, I know, but— This is wonderful.
I'm enjoying it.
It surprises me.
You really couldn't imagine starting a novel unless you knew where it was taking— No, no.
I know that there are people who do just sit down
start going somewhere.
I could not do that.
Your characters don't change on you.
They're pretty much under control.
I think one does learn some new things about them.
And obviously there are some inventions that simply come along.
But those are more in the nature of, for me, they're more in the nature of
the writing of the presentation, the description of the dialogue, if you like, just funny things that occur to them.
But I know precisely what's going to happen and how people are going to behave and what they're going to do.
Do you have your next novel pretty much in mind?
Well, I do as an author.
And I don't expect you to talk about it, because I know... No, it's too soon.
And also, it would run against my superstitious principles.
No, and that I appreciate.
And frankly, when you try and give a one or two sentence description of a work in progress, it always sounds silly.
You can't do it.
Besides, as we said at the beginning, how does one describe
a book, for instance, if you say, what is war and peace about?
It's about war.
It's like saying, Hamlet is a revenge play.
That's right.
You know, he's talking about a man who's lost his father.
Okay.
Well, I don't want to pick up too much of your time.
I have the work, and that's number one.
If I have any other questions, I'm sure I'll be able to get in touch with you.
Well, you can call me.
Will you give me a phone number?
Best to call me at the office.
Okay.
It's 212-909-6273.
6273?
Yes, but I won't be there next week.
Okay.
I'll be writing, as I mentioned, I have a half a dozen papers that take me every week, and I will be doing a piece for Hamptons, which starts over Memorial Day, and it'll be shortly thereafter.
So I think whatever questions I might have would really be for that piece.
There will be a different piece.
And I'm really delighted to be in there.
Of course.
It's a nice little outland for me.
I don't think I need any more.